Week 3
------

How People Read Books
---------------------
Some books were designed for certain readers. Popular with children are minature bibles, summarizing the stories in a language that is acessible to them.
Some books have writing in the margins - this is called "marginalia". Other books have the owners nam written, or a note to someone when given as a gift.
Some printers had a "crowdfunding" relationship with its readers, using reader subscriptions to help get the books printed. Inside the book would be a list of the people that helped.

Provenance
----------
That is: how people read books, who read books, how they were bought, collected, preserved, and passed on.
Provenance  - the technical meaning is a record of ownership. This is important for rare books and people who collect and restore them. 
There can be clues in maringalia, signings, printing, etc as to the provenance of the book. A simple printing mark can indicate exactly when and where a book was printed.
Original owners can be interesting, but sometimes the people that the book is passed to have a more important part of history.
Amorial Bindings are things like heraldic devices (indicating family lines or prestigeous associations), coat of arms (for noble families originally, but extended to churches, cities, and corporations) - that appear as part of the binding. 

The Preface
-----------
The preface is about relationships. It will acknowledge family & friends. This is a paratext. Today there is less included in prefaces. In pre modern times they were more elaborate and substantial. It is often used to prepare the reader for what is to follow, to give advice on how to interpret the book. This can give important context to what is to follow. Older prefaces also would refer to patrons, expressing thanks and giving recompense for their help.

Annotating Books
----------------
The first century saw it a commonplace thing to annotate book. TO give opinions and comments on teh subject matter can be quite illuminating. Annotations can make a book much more unique.

Taking notes
------------
When reading a book, notes were taken. These could be quite informal to quite elaborate. The more extensive ones would actually be bound into a notebook (called "miscellanea") , and there are cases of notebooks being built to write in. Some people even devised a system of storing notes because they were so voluminous, to make further research easier. These were called "common-placing" - to allow quick x-reference to other books.

The Fagels and their library
----------------------------
The Fagel Collection in Trinity College Dublin is the family library of an important political dynasty in the early modern Netherlands. The collection was started by François Fagel the Eldest (1585-1644).
The collection has maps. pamphlets, books, and other printed items. It was a family library as well as a working library. The family was inportant for 125 years in the Netherlands until the French (Napolean) invaded in 1794, when Hendrik Fagel the Younger went into exile.
The library at the time reflects the current Dutch political context, and what was going on in the world. Books of such things as an arctic expedition. One book examines the voyage of Captain Frobisher. Political books that ask such questions as "What does it take to produce good citizens?" and "How should government be organized?" 
It also houses important information of the emergence of Dutch states during the Dutch revolt (1568–1648) and the emergence of the Dutch as world travellers and mappers. Such documents as the declaration of sovereignty from the King of Spain.
Books were mostly printed in the Netherlands, but there were also many from all over Europe. Portugal, Latvia, Sweden, Russia, ... The majority were in Latin, followed by English, French, Dutch, and German. Two thirds of the collection is from the 18c and a quarter from the 17c. Books range ferom Botony, Alchemy, Politics, Science, History, and much more.
	- 20,000 books
	- 12,000 pamphlets (Trinity long room - 5,000+ pamphlets in 270 volumes)
	- 24 map portfolios

Music
-----
Early modern Europe had a vibrant folksong and ballad tradition.
Printers looking for a source of revenue produced "Broadsides". Single sheets of music with colourful pictures. These were very topical and few survive today. Ballads were ideal for this format. Even Martin Luther published a musical book ("Little Handbook" - 1524) as music was a very popular medium. Most of the songs were freom his own hand. This book was meant for individual consumption, not communal singing. His book was quickly followed by a pirated version! Trinity holds the last copy of this hymnbook from Luther. Music played an important part of Dutch reformation, but not Scottish or English.
Because of the lack of English songs, singing from Psalms was popular. One of the most popular books was "Certain Psalms Chose out of the Psalter of David and Drawn" by Thomas Sternhold (better known as Sternhold and Hopkins). It wasn't very fluid, the joke was: that their piety was better than their poetry. Nevertheless, it was popular,  280 editions popular.
One innovation was the "Table top Format" - this had the song music printed in all 4 directions so people could sit in a circel and all be able to follow along & sing.

Literacy and handwriting
------------------------
The early modern period (1500–1800) saw an increase in the number of people that were taught to read and write. Universal schooling is still a long ways off. It's hard to know the rates of literacy, many could read but it did not correspond to the number who could write.
1700 - Netherlands women - 44% could read and write
1700 - England women - 25% could read and write
1700 - Swedish woman - 80% cold read, unknown about writing

Rising literacy rates meant more books were published, and more books to teach this were written. Some were targeted towards schools, and others towards the home. 

Survival of manuscript
----------------------
With the rise of electronic texts, what place do books have? 
In the 16th century, scholars lamented the transition from manuscripts to printed texts. Old manuscript reading was transformed into reading printed books.
There is middle ground between publication or not. A "coterie" is a confined circle of suitable readers in which a book could circulate. This was popular for books that might destroy a reputation, come under scrutiny by the state or church and have nasty repercussions. This made these books hard to study because the coterie may have had a code to obscure the meaning.

