Week 4
------

Religion
--------
The reformation of religion was helped by print. This occurs in the early 16th century. Earlier attempts by John Wycliffe and Jan Hus were stymied by how expensive it was to produce books. Ideas could only spread via text, like the Wycliffe bible. Local impact was good, but the church could easily contain the spread. Martin Luther had the advantage of a cheaper press and produced short books that were easy to disemminate. He worked with printers and woodcut artistsand book sellers to have his ideas spread. He actually was a big influence on printed books and made them advance much faster than they were. A cwelibrity author. Protestants quickly became known as the religion of the book. The book played a vital role in bringing in reformation into society.

The litergy of the Catholic church was in Latin. This made in mostly inaccessible to the masses. The book "The Book of Common Prayer" by Thomas Cranmer - provided English language litergy, common prayer. The English church still uses it today. Such things as the marriage vows "..until death do you part." Cranmer, the archbishop of Canterbury, was inspired by the writings of Jan Hus, and had a copy of his book. It was influencial in the Common prayer book Cranmer made. A Cambridge Don, fell into a job to help Henry 8th get rid of one wife and replace her with another (Catherine of Aragorn -> Ann Boleyn) - using religion. Cranmer was sympathetic to reformation and pushed those ideas. This was ok for Henry VIII and Edward the 6th, not so much Bloodly Mary - he died at the stake under her.

Preaching the word by text and image
------------------------------------
The early modern period saw great ideas put forth in books on science, religion, and medicine. They challenged many currently held beliefs. Literacy was inproving, but the masses could not read. 

Catholics were preached to in Latin, so there was little reason to learn to read or write. Catholic mass had grand churches, and spectacular visuals (paintings, sculptures, stained glass, vestments) to help preach. Reformers avoided any of these visual things and actually destroyed questionable images (Cromwell). But for masses used to such things how did the reformation survive? Books and images of martyers. Both of these proved to be excellent sources for text and images!

Martin Luther was a pioneer of this area. He worked with artists to make illustrations for his books. Biblical imagery proved to be a great tool for educating the masses. The artists used contemporary clothing, which made the characters in the old testament become much more relatable. Reformers were a little timid about this as they were quite opposed to promoting Saints. Martyers and biblical figures like Adam and Eve, or David & Goliath, not so much. You could produce a narrative of suffering under the Pope and offer an alternate line of authority. 

One book has the great picture explained with 'A most exact Table of the first ten Persecutions of the Primitive Church under the Heathen Tyrants of Rome.’ Martyers and gory deaths made for great visuals to compete with Catholics. Some of these books had numerous woodcuts, setting records for woodcuts produced for a single book. The famous Foxe’s Book of Martyrs (1563) had over 60 woodcuts. Foxe's book had for example the martyrdom of Thomas Cranmer as a woodcut. This shaped how the English saw themselves in the world.

Transforming medicine and science
---------------------------------
Nicolaus Copernicus, a Polish astronomer published "De Revolutionibus Orbius Coelestis" (1543) that said the Sun not the Earth was at the centre of our solar system. 
Andreas Vesalius, an Flemish anatomist published "De Humani Corporis Fabrica" (1543) that told readers that they should not rely on on 2nd Century understanding of the body, but that dissection should be hands on and a new approach to anatomical studies.
THe 16th Century saw a number of books exploring modern plants and animals. This led to developing a system of plant identification & classification. This led to the Linnaean system of plant classification in the 18th century.	
Sir Issac Newtons Principa led to great disemmination od scientic knowledge as well as international collaboration and exchange.

Print and the medical marketplace
---------------------------------
Galen of Pergamon (129;-circa 200) was still the most celebrated medical author. He focused on the 4 Humors (blood, phlegm, black bile and yellow bile). This built on the works of Aristotle. New diseases arose in the 16th c and this demanded a new medical approachy, books helped that alot. Andreas Vesalius, De Humani Corporis Fabrica (Basel, 1543) was one such book.

Print and the scientific revolution
-----------------------------------
Nicolaus Copernicus argued that the Earth revolved around the sun, not the Claudius Ptolemy one of the Sun around the Earth, which was supported by the church. Because of this he delayed publication. He used words to soften the radicalness of the publication. Instead of "radical astonomer" it was a "mathematician" proposing just an hypothesis.
The most famous book of this era was Newton’s Principia. It was being read hot off the press. This book revolutionized scientific research at this period.

Reforming the state
-------------------
Les Révolutions de Paris was originally a one-edition pamplet. It presented politics in the early modern period by describing the extraordinary events that took place in Paris in mid-July 1789. News of the storming of the Bastille and the arming of common people of Paris created instant bestsellers. Hence is became a weekly newsletter. This was just one of 140 newspapers that France saw that year. It had readership of 100,000 at its peak. It lasted about 5 years until it became to dangerous to print, during the "Terror". It's average print run was 10,000. It employed writers and even had a sales manager. Not only did the writers narrate events, but they tried to explain them too. Woodcuts were common and detailed. They did not shy away from bloodshed, as shown by heads on likes. They tried to cover the consequences too. The audience was becoming more literate and news hungry. 
The coming of the French Revolution has huge implications for print. State bankruptcy and the loss of state censorship resulted ub over 4,000 political pamplets being produced. The collapse of the government created quite an appetite for news. 

The Enlightenment and print
---------------------------
There are many examples of Enlightenment. Voltaire’s Traité sur la tolérance (Treatise on Tolerance) is a good example.
It was published in Geneva in November 1763. A Scottish novelist Tobias Smollett printed an English translation  by a Dublin bookseller, John Exshaw of Dame Street, in 1764. Less than a year later.
Its origins was a infamous miscarriage of justice, a judicial murder that shocked Europe. On 13 October 1761, Marc-Antoine Calas was found dead in his father’s shop in the southern French city of Toulouse. It was probably suicide but the Calas family was Protestant and it was aledged that he was killed by his father to prevent him from converting to Catholicism. With no evidence Jean was convicted (March 1762), cruelly tortured, and executed. Voltaire heard about this and became obsessed to correct this. He approached this on many fronts, but key was the publication of the "Traité sur la tolérance" in November 1763. He argued that religious minorities should be free to worship as they may. This went beyond the authorities straight to the public, whofell behind this quite readily as did the court.
In June 1764, the King’s Council annulled Calas’ conviction, and the following March, his name was finally cleared and his family fully rehabilitated. 
Dublin was a thriving centre of publication and translation in the mid-eighteenth century and Voltaire’s writings were widely available, in both French and English translation, to the Irish reading public. At least twenty such translations appeared in the 1760s alone. 
When Voltaire took up a cause, it became a matter of immediate, international concern. In an ever more inter-connected Europe, new ways of thinking about religion’s place in the body politic and new conceptualizations of citizenship and the state were increasingly common among educated Europeans, and those ideas would prove just as revolutionary in Ireland as they did in France.

Republic of Letters. The eighteenth-century Republic of Letters was a quintessentially international community of writers and readers and Voltaire, from his estate at Ferney on the Franco-Swiss border, was quite literally at the heart of this pulsating network of intellectual exchange. His works were published throughout Europe, from Sicily to Stockholm and from Istanbul to Edinburgh in the 1750s and ‘60s, and Dublin was no exception.


https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/history-of-the-book/1/steps/565276