Week 2
------

Bestsellers
-----------
Religion played an important part, the bible being a good bet for a bestseller.

One best sellers was Sir Thomas Elyot's The Castel of helthe, published in 1534 London ran for 17 editions until 1660. It covered health wisdom at the time, which included the 4 humors. Another bestseller in 1493 was the Nuremberg Chronicle. It was heavily illustrated and covered biblical stories and world history.

Besides these larger books, broadsheets, ballads, newspapers, pamphlets, and cheap books were popular. They could be produced cheaply, didn't need a solid binding and were accessible by the general population. A popular cheap book was the yearly Alamanac. Mid 17th century, 1 in 3 houses had an alamanac. At this time 1/2 of the book output was religious in nature.

The Nuremberg Chronicle. This 1493 book was a bestseller. It was printed in Nuremberg and was a large book with many illustrations. 693 woodcuts were created and it had a run of 2500 copies. 1500 in Latin and 1000 in German. 558 copies remain unsold in 1508 (49 German, 509 Latin). Even today there are over 700 copies survive. It was finanaced by 2 leading Nuremberg merchants, printed by a famous Nuremberg printer (largest in Europe), and the art was from two localm famous artists. It had all the right connections and covered a current interest in world chronicles. There was a 2nd edition printed. 

It was so popular that a pirate German-only language version was created, using smaller font and cheaper (lower quality) illustrations and it used less paper and was therefore cheaper. It was so poplar that he made a Latin edition and even a 2nd German edition.



The Bible 
---------
There was a reformation movement in 16th Century that focused on letting people read directly from the bible and not what was taught at the pulpit. Therefore a wave of bible translations hit the book scene. Up until this time the Vulgate was the chief translation of the Old and New Testament done by Jerome in 5th Century (d. 420ad). Desiderius Erasmus (1466–1536) wanted to change this, so "Novum Instrumentum omne" was published in 1516. It had side by side Latin & Greek and there was some commentary by Erasmus. Later editions called it "Novum Testamentum omne".

In a rush to beat a Spanish effort called "Complutensian Polyglot", there were a fair numbers of errors. But that did give him the contract to print the Greek New Testament for Emperor Maximilian (1459-1519) and Pope Leo X (1474-1521). It also was the basis for all other translations in the 16th century.

Martin Luther translated the New Testament into German in 1522, and his translation of the whole Bible into German was published in 1534. Lefèvre d’Etaples (1450-1536) did the translation of the Bible into French in 1530. 

Prior to this the followers of John Wycliffe published an English version. About 150 years later William Tyndale published an illegal translation in 1525. You needed Bishop approval to be legal. He learned Hebrew and was embarking on updating it before he was captured & killed. It was smuggled in large quantities into England. The Matthew Bible used Tyndales bible and his unfinished updated notes and other help to produce the first legal English bible. Later the Great Bible was created by Henry VIII, again relying heavily on Tyndale.


Childrens Books
---------------
Childrens books have been popular from the beginning of printing. Often they are beautifully illustrated, but sometimes not. The 18th century saw a large spike in childrens books. The books often carry a heavy moral overtone and many were playful with the reader. One example has the subject of the book "Jack", addressing  "Tommy" or "Polly" as they are about to read the book. Today, it seems that the books are meant for adults, or rather directed at them.

My favorite was:  A popular childrens book by James Janeway: "A token for children: being an exact account of the conversion, holy and exemplary lives, and joyful deaths, of several young children" was published in 1709. This book was reprinted many times, it remained popular for about 100 years. 
see: https://archive.org/details/tokenforchi00janeiala/page/n2

So many kids books were being published by the end of the 18th Century that journals were written to review and recommend childrens books.


Advertising
-----------
Advertising is an important part of selling books. Originally the handbill was created to highlight a book, author, description, and where the book could be purchased. The title page of a book is a typical handbill. These developed into a typical thing you'd call click-bait today. Promising great things if you read the book. These would only highlight a single book. Later, a calatlog of books sold would be printed. Brand identity also came ito play, where book printers whould have some crest or logo and customers could identify.
Around the end of the 16th century the Auction idea started. Auctions for books, often 2nd hand books, gave listings of books that would be for sale. A catalog of books for sale would be created for these.


Title Pages
-----------
Books during this period were often bound simply, for the mass market. The title page therefore took centre stage. Some contained adverts for other books, some highlighted the authors other books, and some summarized the book itself. It often had information like author, publishers, printers, and date of publication. It could be highly decorated or have lush illustrations, which would hint at the type of book it is. The format of this page changed with time. This is called a "paratext". It is parallel to the story but provides other information about the book or story. Or adverts to other works.
One great example is "Gulliver’s Travels" which had title changes amoung other changes. The first edition (1726) was actually called "Travels Into Several Remote Nations of the World. In Four Parts". The next edition also in 1726 has the information:  “in this impression, several errors in the London edition are corrected.” Because it was a satirical work, the original publisher Benjamin Motte had changed some names in the book to avoid anticipated legal action.
The first editions also hide the true author Jonathan Swift, and instead used the name "Lemuel Gulliver". Later editions also showed a woodcut of "Captain Gulliver" as if he were a real person. One such title page had the words under the portrait: "Splendide Mendax" which roughly translates as "lying for a good cause" or "nobly false" - too funny!
Another edition in 1773 says that there are two parts in the book (not the 4 from the first edition) but there are in fact only 1 part in the book. And now the author is "Dean Swift". Another edition has the regular title page, but the contents are pirated from other works!


Printers' Devices
-----------------
Printers’ devices (aka printer's mark) share similar traits to title pages. These started to appear mid 15th century. It was like a trademark for printers, used to identify and brand a printer. A familiar one was the Dolphin & Anchor used by the Venetian printer Aldus Manutius (1502).
See: https://crai.ub.edu/sites/default/files/impressors/home_eng.htm

They were prominent up to the early 16th century, and retreated into the background in the 17th century, usually near the colophon. Often they were printed in red.
See:https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.b4192090&view=2up&seq=8


Censorship
----------
In 1559 the Catholic church published the "Index" - a list what to censor. It could be the entire works of an author down to a sentance in a book to censor. One method of censorship was licensing. 
States would also get into the act, looking to prevent the printing of certain types of bookslabeling them seditious or heretical. You had to submit to the state for approval or rejection. Louis XIV of France did this as well as Emperor Charles V. The Protestant Reformation was targetted by Charles. Caught up in that was Martin Luther, declared an outlaw at the Diet (Assembly) of Worms (1521) (city in Germany). 
Some censorship was actually the desire to prevent publishers from being persucuted post production by police , parliament, and religions. With a royal license to printm less flack from other parties.
How effective was this censorship? Decreeing something and actually preventing it are two differrent matters. Printers could easily move to more tolerant countries, with books smuggled back to more restricted countries. The clandestine book trade was alive and well in early modern Europe.
This is a wide and varied subject, given little attention here.

Book Auctions
-------------
These were meant to appeal to a wide as possible range of people. The book collector was rare, that is, one who would look at a book as a valuable object worthy of a high price. Auctions had catalogs of books for sale, as well as the rules of the auction. Similar to today, the highest bidder gets the book or block of books. 
Some auctions would just list books in order, others would arrange by subject. As time went on, the benefit of giving more information became apparent. The publisher information for example was included. By the 18th century these catalogs became quite comprehensive, even as far as books as objects of worth beyond production costs. Some auctions are done to 

Buying & Selling
----------------
Originally books were:
-inherited
-bought from street vendors (mostly pamphlets & almanacs)
-from a printer (better quality books)
-book trade fairs
-auctions (late 16th century)
Books were sold bound or unbound. Obviously unbound was cheaper, but also allowed collectors to bind the books in hte style of their library. Also, unbound books were lighter, so cheaper to transport internationally.
Mid 15th century until the 17th century the biggest book fair as in Frankfurt Book Fair. Amsterdam as also an important centre for the buying & selling of books. A catalog was printed for book sfair, and books were sold to fair vendors ar wholesale prices. These were for new books. By the end of the 16th century, it was obvious that 2nd hand books should be sold this way. This is especially true of acadmeic books by universities, that needed a constant stream of books to be bought & sold. There are cases of exaggerated claims to get people to come to the fairs. Little has changed in human dealings!

Connoisseur collectors
----------------------
Originally these people were few. They collected books for different reasons. Mid 16 century Jean Grolier collected for the prestigue it gave him at the court. Grolier employed a range of binders to bind books with custom bindings and have his name gold tooled on books. He actually saw himself as a collector of books. It was a way to display wealth, as books were expensive. 
By the 18 century books were also now collected based upon the rarity, as a few humdred years had made some books rare. So actually Grolier's books that he had bound also became collected because they were owned by him. We see more people collecting all books on certain subjects, as well as printers. Famous printers such as Aldine also became much sought after. 


