The Book of Kells
-----------------

The Book of Kells BoK) contains the four Gospels in Latin based on the Vulgate text which St Jerome completed in 384AD, intermixed with readings from the earlier Old Latin translation. The Gospel texts are prefaced by other texts, including "canon tables", or concordances of Gospel passages common to two or more of the evangelists; summaries of the gospel narratives; and prefaces characterizing the evangelists. The book is written on vellum in a bold and expert version of the script known as "insular majuscule". It contains 340 folios, now measuring approximately 330 x 255 mm; they were severely trimmed, and their edges gilded, in the course of rebinding in the 19th century.

Week 1: The History of the Book of Kells
----------------------------------------
1 Million people a year look at a 1200 year old book (manuscript - a book, document, or piece of music written by hand rather than typed or printed.).
It's currently at Trinity College in Ireland.
The name the Book of Kells comes from the Monastery at Kells in what is now modern County Meath. The monastery was founded in 807 by monks fleeing Viking attacks on the western Scottish island of Iona. It is believed to have been started in Iona.
In Kells it was known as "The Great Gospel Book of Columcille". Columcille (or St Colum Cille or Columba?) was an early Irish Saint, well regarded.

The Irish saw themselves as Christians and unique, yet in contact with Rome. 
It's a Gospel book. There are other Gospel books, but the book of Kells is by far the most important. It contains the 4 Gospels from the New Testament. Created in the 8-9th Centuries, during a time of great learning. People came from mainland Europe to learn from Irish monestaries. Christinaity hit mainstream in Ireland mid 5th Centuey. By the 11th Century it was considered a "relic" of Columcille.
It is written in Insular majuscule (unique to Ireland). Every page has illumination. It is mostly written in Vulgate. There is some "Old  Latin" portions.

It was placed in a jeweled cover, which was then storlen & the manuscript buried. When recovered it was kept at a church in  Kells til the 17th century, when it went to Trinity college for safe keeping.

The Irish became quite fervent Christians, establishing church focused settlements in mainland Europe. Pilgrims and clerics from Ireland would visit these places. There would be shared knowledge and mainland Europeans visiting Irelands monestaries. The Irish became famous for travelling to different places. Books and scholarship traveled to and from Ireland & Europe. All this provides some insight to the ideas and images of the book of Kells. 


Commissioning the Book of Kells
-------------------------------
This was a time of religious flourishing. Ireland was well regarded and had regular contact with other Christians all over Europe.
It is not clear who commissioned the book, that information has been lost. It is tied to a famous St Colum Cille, who was a noted scribe at the time.
One theory is due to the creation of a new shrine for the saint on Iona in the mid-eighth century, this book was commissioned. (Iona, western Scotland)
Another theory is it may have been made to commemorate the bi-centenary of the saint Colum Cille death in 797. (Kells, Co. Meath)
Connachtach, abbot of Iona (where book was) was described as a ‘choice scribe’, died in 802, 
It is a religious work, but often secular money was used, to show piety.

Uses of the Book of Kells
-------------------------
In the early Middle Ages, books were transcribed for a number of reasons. 
	- an addition to a monastery’s library, for use during Mass.
	- as a diplomatic gift. 
	- tools for travelling clerics.
	- as a means of displaying the wealth and status of a particular church.
At 33cm x 25.5 cm, (13"x10") the Book of the Kells was meant for display.	
Late 11c and early 12c - the book had land transactions recorded in it. This was typically done to "enhance" the land ownership.
In 1621 the Bishop of Meath, James Ussher studied it together with another medieval manuscript attributed to the hand of St Columcille at Durrow. To distinguish between the two (both known as the gospel of St Columcille) his is the first recorded naming of the manuscript as ‘The Book of Kells’.


Physical Setting of Book of Kells
---------------------------------
It is almost certain that it was made at a Christian centre associated with the cult of St Colum Cille; most likely Iona in Western Scotland, and/or Kells in Co. Meath in Ireland.
Early medieval Irish Church settlements are typically referred to as monasteries – places where a group of religious people lived and worshipped together in relative isolation from the outside world. 
But there was also lots of variety - from hermitages to busy crossroads.
The book of Kells was originally called the great Gospel of Columkille, (Columba). This from a 1007 chronicle of it being stolen, it's jeweled cover ripped off and it buried under "sod". It was recovered (of course) but probably missing some folios.
These settlements were small and simple. Up to 8c they were timber, so little has has survived. Small stone churches followed and se have many of them. By 10c larger settlements built stone bell towers to call people to prayer. These towers would also be used to store valuables during raids.

Kells
-----
In 1007 it was recorded the the Book of Kells was stolen. Thieves were after the expensive jeweled cover. This is actually the first recorded instance we have of the location (Kells) of the book of Kells. The stone crosses in Kells have different styles of art when compared to the book. They are roughly created 100 after the book. But there are parallels, like gospel topics and crouching warriors and Cainhaving a pointed chin.

Artistic Background
-------------------
The years 650 and 950AD saw a unique art style emerge from Ireland. Dense patterns, swirls and geometric patterns taken from the pre-Christian (Celtic) world, abstract animals patterns (Germanic & Anglo-Saxon influence), and Mediterranean patterns. It was used a lot in religious worship. Insular - This term dervies from the Latin word insula or ‘island’ and is used to describe the art style associated with the islands of Ireland and Britain in the early medieval period. Some prefer it over Celtic, to acknowledge that it came from both Ireland and Britain.
The art was used on everything from stone to books to chalices.

Making the Book of Kells
------------------------
This was a very highly skilled process
Materials had to be gathered, like parchment. Vellum is calf skin.  Even colours were also very tough to obtain for the common person.

The scriptorium
---------------
https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/book-of-kells/1/steps/346804