Week 3: Meanings of the Book of Kells
-------------------------------------

The Book of Kells has quite fantastic art. Why is this so? There are many reasons. One is that to make the words of the book look important, to visibly manifest that they are important. Images were to help tell the biblical story, to help engage the reader by showing holy figures. Another use was symbols, again to make the readerbecome engaged in the story and meaning, to help them ponder deeper. It is meant to perplex a little, again to stimulate thought and produce meaning.

Decorating medieval gospel books
--------------------------------
The bible does say that you are not to bow down and worship images. The Eastern church (Byzantine) elevated icons of holy figures so that they were starting to bow down and worship them. Many were destroyed and symbols replaced them. The Western church maintained figurative artwork, to tell the stories of Holy men but not to worship, to tell a story. The BoK has both of these traditions.
At first translation were pure text, but that slowly changed. In 331AD the emperor Constantine ordered the manufacture of 50 new decorated gospel books for the churches of Constantinople. By the time the BoK came out the art was in full swing.
At first decorative elements separated the gospels. Then Canon tables were decorated. These were at the beginning of the gospels to cross reference concordances. They were is tables decorated by arches, to  suggest holiness, or a gateway to knowledge. 
In early Mediterranean, Coptic and Insular gospel books they were shown in symbolic form – typically:
	- Matthew - man
	- Mark - lion
	- Luke - ox/calf
	- John - eagle
	- Jesus Christ - cross or lozenge form
By the 9th century they were shown in human form. It was common to see an image of Jesus with his 4 "evangelists" (writers of the gospels). 

Narrative Images
These are images that tell a story. They feature in some of the earliest Gospel books, such as the late sixth-century St Augustine Gospels, but by the eighth-century they were rare. The BoK has 3 such images: virgin birth, passion, and temptation, we'll visit these later. Passsion is the term given to the events leading up to and including Christ’s death.

‘Carpet’ Pages
A unique characteristic of some Coptic and Insular gospel manuscripts are pages with pure decoration. because they look like Persian rugs they were called "carpet" pages/  The BoK has just one carpet page, they may have been others in the lost pages. It is a dense cross with 2 arms. 

Decorated initials
Enlarging and illuminating the first letter or word of text (known as incipits, Latin for ‘beginning’). It is thought this originated in Ireland & Britain and spread to the mainland. 

BoK: https://digitalcollections.tcd.ie/home/index.php?DRIS_ID=MS58_003v
Book of Dimma: https://digitalcollections.tcd.ie/home/index.php?DRIS_ID=MS58_003v
Harley Gospels: https://www.bl.uk/manuscripts/FullDisplay.aspx?ref=Harley_MS_2788
Lindisfarne Gospels: https://www.bl.uk/manuscripts/Viewer.aspx?ref=cotton_ms_nero_d_iv_f002r
Gospel St-Riquier: https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b55005654j


The Evangelists
---------------
The word evangelist came from the Greek word εὐάγγελος (euangelos, ‘bringing good news’) (εὖ (eu, ‘well, good’) and ἀγγέλλειν (angelein, ‘to announce’). These are the four people that wrote the four gospels – Matthew, Mark, Luke and John. The BoK shows them as people but also as symbols.
	- Matthew - man
	- Mark - lion
	- Luke - ox/calf
	- John - eagle
These come from two biblical sources, first the Old Testament: 
		"... - and the four had the face of a human being, the face of a lion on the right side, 
		     the face of an ox on the left side, and the face of an eagle." - Ezekiel 1:4–11 
And from Revalations:
		"... the first living creature like a lion, the second living creature like an ox, 
		 the third living creature with a face like a human face, and the fourth living 
		 creature like a flying eagle." - Revelation 4:6-8
This was not always the case, but by the 6th century it was. The order of the gospels as we know them was favoured by St Jerome (b. 347). The gospel opened up symbiotically related to the text - as noted by Jerome.
Matthew opened up with genealogy - man.
Mark opened up with "a voice crying in the wilderness", tken to mean a Lions roar.
Luke opened with the priest Zachariah sacrificing an animal, typically as ox/calf.
John is quite mystical, so soaring on an eagles wing.


Symbols of Christ
-----------------
In early Christianity, they were not part of the wealth elite, so commissioning works of art was not done much. It was not until the 4th century that Christianity emerged from the shadows. Before then it had to be practiced in secret. Also, the 2nd commandment about no graven images was interpreted as a ban on drawing holy figures. Consequently symbols were used in early Christianity. By the time of the BoK both images and symbols were in use, providing a more complex or layered meaning to the books illustrations.

The cross is also very recognizable as a Christian symbol. In one BoK page, the whole page is dedicated to the cross. The cross will sometimes have "arms" signifying the foot rest and the sign over the head of Jesus on the cross. 

Chi (χ) and Rho (ρ) are the first two letters of the Greek word Christ - Χριστος (Christos in Latin). Used as a shorthand for writing Christs's name. The chi is very close to a cross, so has added meaning. 

The lozenge - or diamond shape is also used to represent Christ. The reasons are unclear, but there are a few theories. One, is that it represents the 4 corners of the world,  earth-fire-air-water, or north-south-east-west, or that the universe was created in 4 days. Sometimes the lozenge is used in place of an "o", or placed on a book to mean it represents the word of god - as seen in the gospel of John. "The Word was God".

Number symbols were also used. 8 - number of days leading up to cruxifiction. 4- number of gospels, a lozenge. 3 - the trinity. You'll see 3 dots, which allude to the trinity, scribed in images and in letters. There are also may 3-part designs in the art.


Eucharistic imagery
-------------------
There are two key sacraments central to Christianity – Baptism and the Eucharist. These are events that are to bring you closer to God. Eucharist is also known as mass, communion, or the Lord's Supper. Eucharist was quite important to the places where the BoK was written. It was believed that it gave them strength or spiritual nourishment. Eucharist is Greek (Eucharistia) for thanksgiving. It is based around the last supper of Christ where bread & wine were served. The images of bread (with a cross) and a chalice (cup) for wine is often used in imagery in the BoK. With wine - you have associated vine imagery. You will find all three quite often in the BoK. By the time BoK was created, unleavened bread was quite common, so you will see images of wafers, often stamped with a cross.

Intertwined men and animals
---------------------------
These were used for many different purposes. Depicted were men (never women), lions, birds, and snakes.
Sometimes there was direct relations to the text. Other times it was more symbolic. At the time, there was folklore about animals, one being that  lion cubs are born dead and male lions breath life into them after 3 days. Snakes, shed their skin or are born again, and peacocks when they die their flesh remains intact, plus they have many eyes. These all alude to Jesus. Therefore, these animals will make up latters, to draw attention extra attention to what they say. 
Knots and intertwined strands were often used in doorway arches to confuse evil spirits, so they were a form of protection. This is believed to be a possible reason for them in the BoK. But there are interpretations that are quite different about this, so this is an unknown.

Fish in the Book of Kells
-------------------------
There are numerous images of fish in the BoK. The fish has been used as a symbol since 2nd century. Clement, a theologian and bishop of Alexandria (c. 150 – 215AD) recommended the suitability of the fish symbol as ‘if someone is fishing he will call to mind the apostle and the children [newly baptised Christians?] drawn up out of the water.’ Jesus also is associated as a 'fisher of men'.
Augustine of Hippo (345 – 430) pointed out that fish also denoted the name of Christ, as the letters of the Greek word for fish, IXθYΣ, were an acronym for the words Jesus/Christ/Son of God/Saviour.
Irish, Scottish, and Welsh all have salmon myths, similar to the Adam & Eve and the tree of knowledge.
In the BoK the fish are more realistic than the symbols used in other CHristian manuscripts. Salmon was mostly depicted as it had a noble status in Ireland. It was used in letters, to highlight an abbreviation of Jesus's name. It is seen biting others and being bitten by an otter, probably helping to symbolize the Eucharist.

Cats in the Book of Kells
-------------------------
There are no distinct cat-Jesus connections. However, the Irish loer had cats on Noahs ark to control the mouse population - to protect the food onboard. When the BoK was written, cats were domesticated, but mostly by high status individuals. There were penalties for harming a cat. Entire sections of law were dedicated to outlining fines for harming a cat. A cat was considered worth 3 cows - for keeping mice away from feed and purring. If it just purred, it was worth 1.5 cows. Some cat names: Méone (‘little meow’) and Cruibne (‘little paws’).


The Temptation of Christ
------------------------
After the baptism of Jesus he went into the desert for 40 days where the devil tried to tempt him three times. 
One famous folio (Folio 202v) has a Christ on a traditional early Irish timber church. The colours are from the bible, Moses' Tabernacle. The devil is an inky black, but originally he was most often depicted in reds and browns. He also had cloven hoofs and a twisting tongue. Also, the actual BoK has physical stab marks in the vellum on the devil. Curious is that the image appears to be mixing up or not representing the text in the BoK. Like the haloed figure in the doorway - holding crossed rods. This typically means that it is the returning triumphant Christ. Crowds surround the temple, when Christ was actually alone. The 2nd temptation would be more akin to this where the devil promises him all the world. It has been suggested that it represents two temptations. Others suggest that the crowd represent the "living stones" of the church and the haloed figure represent a holy figure or support of the church. That is: people make the church, not the buildings. There could be some local context that is lost to time. Whatever the meaning, it must have had an important meaning for the scribes.
Images of the cruxifiction didn't appear in art until the 8th century. Before that artists focused on the triumph of Jesus over death, so crosses were jeweled (Crux gemmata).

The Arrest of Jesus Christ
--------------------------
In the gospel of Matthew, folio 114r has an illustration that is interpreted as the arrest of Christ. But it is 5 pages before the actual account in Matthew. The image shows 2 priests (not Roman soldiers) grabbing his arms. They also have plants sprouting from their heads. And Judas is nowhere to be found, a key participant in the arrest. The words above his head refer to the account at the last supper. His arms and legs appear to form an "X". The sprouting vines in the pillars typify resurrection. It appears that there are numerous different elements to this. The two priests could be the ones mentioned in Zechariah 2:12-14. Suggestions include that it is not a single event (the passion of christ) but to show his sacrifice in general. 

Virgin and Child
----------------
There is only one image of this in folio 7v.
In the BoK it shows her being an empress, not someone of humble origins. It is the earliest image we have of the Virgin Mary. It is the only woman in the BoK. The hand on the breast signify either the "milk" of CHristianity or the fountain of life.
The composition and symbolism of the image finds some close parallels in panel paintings of the Virgin and Child from the Byzantine east.