
Week 2: Making the Book of Kells
--------------------------------

Manpower
--------
To create a book over a 1000 years ago required a tremendous amoumt of manpower.  We can for grantedf the ease of which books today are made as well as how easilt we can send tect and pictures around the world to millions of people.
People had to have good eyesight, work in low light conditions, be able to read and write with skill, understand design and aesthetic of each page, be able to procure and make vellum, understand how to create colours and inks that would adhere to the vellum, and finally another book to copy/transcribe from. This would take a lot of resources and time.

The scriptorium
---------------
There is little known about these, but it is a small hut (mostly stone) where manuscripts were made. They were cold and had little windows so  light was a problem. Heating them was risky as there are records of fires destroying whole scriptorims. There are often complaints about the cold in the margins of many manuscripts.

The Scribes
-----------
For the most part scribes of manuscripts of this era are unknown. The names of the scribes of the Book of Kells is not known. Some scribes do get attention but often it is written of as the work of Angels making the work excellent.
The focus for scribes was on copying. Different styles of illuminatio  would identify where the manuscript was created. It is hard to diferentiate different scribes work as they are similar. Often a scribe would be responsible for a squire (signature). It is guessed that 2-4 scribes were used to create the Book of Kells, as well as 2-3 artists to make the illuminations.

Irish Scribes
-------------
Although we do not know the names of most scribes, they did write in the margins (marginalia) about many things. Commenting on the tranaslation quality, the vellum quality, how good their penmanship was, birds singing to them, hangovers, need for drink, fear of vikings, their health, missing cats, ... you get the picture.
Ferdomnach signed his name on the manuscript five times, although his name was later erased so that authorship of the manuscript could ascribed to the hand of St Patrick.

The Book - Vellum
-----------------
The book of Kells is made of vellum, which is the skin of a young animal. Kells used calf but goat, sheep, etc could be used. The vellum has natural features that were used strategically. Where the spine is is where the vellum was folded to make squires.

The Binding
-----------

It is estimated that the BOK had 5 different bindings. At one point the pages were trimmed removing valuable evidence as to the original binding. We actually get a hint of the binding by the images in the BOK of closed books! Covers were often wood, covered in leather, stamped patterns as well as metal fittings. Manuscripts were often stored in special decorated boxes of cumdach. In 1007 the BOK was stolen because the cover was encrusted with jewels. The worst rebinding was in 1826, were making the book "tidy" was the goal. Pages trimmed removed some artwork. Pages washed and pressed lost color and shrink unevenly. He tinted flaws in the vellum and painted margins with white oil paint. Another rebind in 1874 was also controversal. In 1950, the conservators goal was to protect the work, which continues today. It was resolved to bind each of the 4 gospels in 4 separate bindings. Two are on display, while two are kept in safes.

Working practice
----------------
I believe that this means getting the parchment ready for writing and painting. 
They would use rulers and compases. Squires were loosely held together with a temporary stitch. Awls were used to make pricks in the parchment at the start and end of script lines. A blunt tool would indent the parchment making a line between the small pricks.
The script was kept a uniform height, consequently there were 17-19 lines per page. Script was done first, followed by illumination (painting aka decoration). The scribe and the artist would work closely together. Of the scribe did both.
Serveral folios in the BoK had some designs roughed in but not completed. Iron gall ink was used. Full page illuminations were done separately and added later. The reverse side was left blank. This means that they could be done independently. 
The BoK had aboutn 700 pages.

Pigments
--------
The colours in the BoK has interested people because of the brilliant colours. Many people wondered about how they were procured. Today we have tools (non-destructive) to help us determine how they were made. There are about 10 different pigments. Originally there were thought to be about 30, but the use of white to change the colours was discovered, as well as extra binder to make it glossy and layering them to make a differernt impression. Pigmenmts were made from many different things. Dyes from plants and from minerals that have been ground and pulverised. A lichen was used to make purple-pink. This is known as orcein and would have been much cheaper to produce than the Tyrian purple used around the Mediterranean that was derived from sea snails.
The principal ink was called iron-gall and was made by extracting a gallotannic acid from an oak apple. It would have been pulverised and soaked in water and mixed with iron sulphide - which when oxideses produces a beautiful ink. It ranged from brown to black.  
The yellow pigment is called orpiment, and is from a mineral. It is very toxic and substitutes for gold. Gold has been used in manuscripts, but the BoK did not use it. Also known as arsenic sulphide, most likely imported from the Iberian peninsula.

The Script
----------
The script used in the BoK was quite distinct and was recognized by the name "libri Scottice" meaning book of Scottish (Irish) script. It shows the influence that Irish had on early medieval period manuscripts. Roman script was probably introduced from Britain to Ireland in the 4th century. By the 6th centiry it had morphed into the "insular" script recognizable today. It is a "majuscule" meaning uppercase script, and is the predominant script used in the BoK.
Once the script was popular, a "minuscule" or lowercase alphabet was createdf. This however, was mostly used for personal books or daily use books. High status books were always majuscule. By the early 12c this script had fallen out of use.


Flaws and imperfections
-----------------------
It is estimated that up to 159 calfskins wwere used to make the BoK. This is an extraordinary amount, so quality will vary. Thickness and color are noticeable as well as imperfections in the tanned vellum. Scribes worked around these and in one case sewed in a large piece to replace a section. Copying text and writing required lots of concentration and at times words are missed or misspelled. In one case and entire section was copied twice! Omitted text would be written in the margins, and in one case a whole page was done twice! Some pages are unfinished. We can only guess the reasons. They used red crosses to indicate missing or to be ignored duplicate text.



Week 3: Meanings of the Book of Kells
-------------------------------------

Art and meaning in the Book of Kells
---------------------

Week 4: Modern life and the Book of Kells
-----------------------------------------